hipaa docs (#859)
elevenlabs/elevenlabs-docs: fern/conversational-ai/pages/customization/privacy/hipaa.mdx

---
title: HIPAA compliance
subtitle: Learn how ElevenLabs Conversational AI supports HIPAA compliance for healthcare applications
---

## Overview

> ElevenLabs Conversational AI now supports HIPAA compliance, allowing healthcare organizations to build voice agents that handle protected health information (PHI) while maintaining regulatory compliance. This feature ensures that sensitive patient data is properly protected throughout the conversation lifecycle.

Reviewer: A note from our compliance page it'd be great to make sure if super clear:

> NOTE 2: With conversational AI, BAA covers only Conversation content only - Agent configuration is persisted and so is not covered by Zero Retention Mode and should not include PHI.

So documents uploaded by an agent owner to the knowledgebase + used by RAG aren't covered.

Reviewer: Would also be good to have a link to out compliance page as it's the source of truth: https://compliance.elevenlabs.io/

> ## How HIPAA Compliance Works

Reviewer 2: Lower case please :)

When HIPAA compliance is enabled for a workspace:

1. **Zero Data Retention (ZDR)** - All sensitive data from conversations is automatically redacted before storage

> 2. **LLM Restrictions** - Only HIPAA-compliant LLMs are available for use

Reviewer: It's said below, but worth making clearer up front that we only restrict some of the _ElevenLabs-provided_ LLMs -- context, providers such as OpenAI won't sign a BAA with us directly, so customers will need to go to OpenAI and sign one, then use their API key with "Custom LLM". So saying GPT 4o mini isn't HIPAA-compliant isn't technically true, just that we can't provide it preconfigured.

Author: fixed in [74ec77d](https://github.com/elevenlabs/elevenlabs-docs/pull/859/commits/74ec77ded7b96e4fe03d9995fe7ee1f85d506fc5)

> 3. **Storage Limitations** - Raw audio files and transcripts containing PHI are not persisted

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. **Storage Limitations** - Raw audio files and transcripts containing PHI are not retained
```

Author: fixed

> 3. **Storage Limitations** - Raw audio files and transcripts containing PHI are not persisted

Reviewer: Need to call out that we also don't store derivative data as well (ie. LLM-produced transcript summary, and tool call parameters/results) + none of this data is logged either

Author: fixed in [3350ce4](https://github.com/elevenlabs/elevenlabs-docs/pull/859/commits/3350ce4c9cbb2c85212baf345459ca39a5b0de8c)

This implementation ensures that PHI is not inadvertently stored or logged in any system components, including:

- Conversation transcripts
- Audio recordings
- Tool calls and results

> - BigQuery analytics

Reviewer 3: This leaks that we use BigQuery. We should never tip off what systems we use internally.
```suggestion
- Data analytics
```

- System logs

## HIPAA-Compliant LLMs

When operating in HIPAA mode, only the following LLMs are available:

<AccordionGroup>

> {' '}

Reviewer 3: angelo plz

<Accordion title="Google Models">

>   - Gemini 2.0 Flash - Gemini 2.0 Flash Lite - Gemini 1.5 Flash - Gemini 1.5 Pro - Gemini 1.0 Pro

Reviewer 3: These all need to be on separate lines.

</Accordion>
<Accordion title="Anthropic Models">
  - Claude 3.7 Sonnet - Claude 3.5 Sonnet - Claude 3.5 Sonnet V1 - Claude 3.0 Haiku
</Accordion>
<Accordion title="Custom LLMs">
  - Custom LLM (always compliant as we don't process the data)
</Accordion>

</AccordionGroup>

## Enabling HIPAA Compliance

> HIPAA compliance is controlled at the workspace level through the `force_logging_disabled` flag in your workspace subscription settings. When enabled:

Reviewer: I don't `force_logging_disabled` is currently user-facing? Regardless we don't really want end users toggling this without security/legal in the loop to make sure the BAA is properly in place. You say this below in the note.

Author: removed reference to force_logging_disabled  and bumped up the notice in [545400a](https://github.com/elevenlabs/elevenlabs-docs/pull/859/commits/545400aee667943b8d46b1cd1ddc388f5eb78796)

1. Non-compliant LLMs will be disabled in the UI with a tooltip explanation
2. Attempts to use non-compliant LLMs via API will return an HTTP error
3. All conversation data will be automatically redacted before storage

<Note>
  HIPAA compliance is only available on Enterprise tier subscriptions. Contact your account
  representative to enable this feature.
</Note>

## Data Redaction

When HIPAA compliance is enabled, the following data is automatically redacted:

> - User messages (replaced with `<REDACTED>`)

Reviewer: The FE now hides `<REDACTED>` with a prettier render, so users should only see this value returned from the API.

- Agent responses containing PHI
- Tool call parameters and results
- Conversation analysis and summaries
- Client-provided data via conversation initiation

## Technical Implementation

> The HIPAA compliance feature implements several safeguards:

Reviewer: & something like "including but not limited to"

The below sounds kinda weak in the context of what we actually need to do to be compliant, going to get @mmancini-work to look over too

1. **LLM Allowlist** - Prevents use of non-compliant LLMs
2. **PII Redaction** - Automatically redacts sensitive fields before storage

> 3. **Storage Prevention** - Disables uploading of raw audio files to GCS

Reviewer 3: Same note about not leaking what we use.
```suggestion
3. **Storage Prevention** - Disables uploading of raw audio files to cloud
```

> 3. **Storage Prevention** - Disables uploading of raw audio files to GCS

Reviewer: Duplicate of above so same comments

4. **Comprehensive Coverage** - Redacts data from all potential storage locations

> ## Developer Experience

Reviewer 3: This is a repeat of earlier information.

When working with HIPAA-compliant agents:

- The UI will disable non-compliant LLMs with a tooltip explanation
- API calls attempting to use non-compliant LLMs will receive an HTTP 400 error
- Conversation history will show redacted content with `<REDACTED>` placeholders
- Analytics data will be limited to non-sensitive metrics

## FAQ

<AccordionGroup>
  <Accordion title="Can I use any LLM with HIPAA compliance enabled?">
    No. When HIPAA compliance is enabled, you can only use LLMs from the approved list. Attempts to

>     use non-compliant LLMs will be blocked. You can always use a custom LLM if you need a specific

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    use non-compliant LLMs will produce an error. You can always use a custom LLM if you need a specific
```

    model not on the allowlist.
  </Accordion>
  <Accordion title="How do I know if my workspace has HIPAA compliance enabled?">

>     HIPAA compliance is controlled by the `force_logging_disabled` flag in your workspace

Reviewer: Same comment as above ref. `force_logging_disabled` being user-facing

    subscription settings. Non-compliant LLMs will be disabled in the UI with a tooltip explanation
    when this feature is active.
  </Accordion>
  <Accordion title="Does HIPAA compliance affect conversation quality?">
    No. HIPAA compliance only affects how data is stored and which LLMs can be used. It does not
    impact the quality or functionality of conversations while they are active.
  </Accordion>
  <Accordion title="Can I still analyze conversation data with HIPAA enabled?">
    Yes, but with limitations. Conversation analytics will only include non-sensitive metadata like
    call duration and success rates. Specific content from conversations will be redacted.
  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

## Best Practices

When building HIPAA-compliant voice agents:

1. **Use Custom LLMs** when possible for maximum control over data processing
2. **Implement proper authentication** for all healthcare applications
3. **Minimize PHI collection** to only what's necessary for the application
4. **Test thoroughly** to ensure no PHI is inadvertently exposed

> 5. **Review conversation logs** to verify proper redaction is occurring

Reviewer: This feels slightly weird to say -- "check we're doing our job right". Maybe tweaking to something like "Validate configuration is correct by checking redaction before launching + passing PHI"?

2. **LLM Provider Restrictions** - Only LLMs from providers with signed Business Associate Agreements (BAAs) are available as preconfigured options
3. **Storage Limitations** - Raw audio files and transcripts containing PHI are not retained

<Note>

If you need to use LLMs that aren't pre-configured in ZDR mode (e.g., OpenAI's GPT-4o mini), you
can still do so by:

1. Obtaining a BAA directly from the provider
2. Using your API key with our Custom LLM integration

</Note>

This implementation ensures that PHI is not inadvertently stored or logged in any system components, including:

- Conversation transcripts
- Audio recordings
- Tool calls and results
- Data analytics
- System logs

<Warning>
  With Conversational AI, the BAA covers only Conversation content only - Agent configuration is
  persisted and so is not covered by Zero Retention Mode and should not include PHI. Therefore,
  documents uploaded by an agent owner to the Knowledge base aren't covered and should not include
  PHI.
</Warning>

### Enabling HIPAA compliance

<Note>

>   HIPAA compliance is only available on Enterprise tier subscriptions and requires proper BAAs to be
>   in place. Contact your account representative to discuss enabling this feature for your
>   organization.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  HIPAA compliance is only available on Enterprise tier subscriptions and requires a BAA to be
  in place between you and ElevenLabs. Contact your account representative to discuss enabling this feature for your
  organization.
```

When working with HIPAA-compliant agents:

<Steps>
  ### Non-compliant LLMs are disabled in the UI
  <Frame
    background="subtle"
    caption="The UI shows disabled LLM options with tooltip explanations"
  >
    ![Redacted conversation analysis showing HIPAA compliance in action](/assets/images/conversational-ai/hipaa-model.png)
  </Frame>

### Content is redacted from content history

<Frame background="subtle" caption="All sensitive information is redacted and not stored">
  ![Redacted conversation history showing HIPAA compliance in
  action](/assets/images/conversational-ai/redacted.png)
</Frame>

### Conversation analysis is limited

<Frame
  background="subtle"
  caption="Analysis and summaries maintain HIPAA compliance through redaction"
>
  ![Redacted conversation analysis showing HIPAA compliance in
  action](/assets/images/conversational-ai/redacted-summary.png)
</Frame>

### API restrictions are enforced

API calls attempting to use non-compliant LLMs will receive an HTTP 400 error. Analytics data will be limited to non-sensitive metrics only.

</Steps>

## FAQ

<AccordionGroup>
  <Accordion title="Can I use any LLM with HIPAA compliance enabled?">

>     No. When HIPAA compliance is enabled, you can only use LLMs from the approved list. Attempts to
>     use non-compliant LLMs will produce an error. You can always use a custom LLM if you need a
>     specific model not on the allowlist.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Some preconfigured LLMs are disabled when HIPAA compliance is enabled, but you can always use your own integration by using the [Custom LLM](https://elevenlabs.io/docs/conversational-ai/customization/custom-llm) option.
```

  </Accordion>
  <Accordion title="How do I know if my workspace has HIPAA compliance enabled?">
    HIPAA compliance is only available to enterprise customers. Please refer to your account
    executive to check if this is enabled.
  </Accordion>
  <Accordion title="Does HIPAA compliance affect conversation quality?">
    No. HIPAA compliance only affects how data is stored and which LLMs can be used. It does not
    impact the quality or functionality of conversations while they are active.
  </Accordion>
  <Accordion title="Can I still analyze conversation data with HIPAA enabled?">
    Yes, but with limitations. Conversation analytics will only include non-sensitive metadata like
    call duration and success rates. Specific content from conversations will be redacted.
  </Accordion>
</AccordionGroup>

## Best practices

When building HIPAA-compliant voice agents:

1. **Use Custom LLMs** when possible for maximum control over data processing
2. **Implement proper authentication** for all healthcare applications

> 3. **Minimize PHI collection** to only what's necessary for the application

Reviewer: In ZDR mode no PHI is saved, so not really anything to minimize?
```suggestion
```

> 4. **Validate configuration** is correct by checking redaction before launching + passing PHI

Reviewer: If the above point is removed.

```suggestion
3. **Validate configuration** is correct by checking redaction before launching + passing PHI
```
